Add documentation on faster NMODL. (#1840)
arbor-sim/arbor: doc/fileformat/nmodl.rst

Modelers are encouraged to verify the expected behavior of the reversal potentials of ions
as it can lead to vastly different model behavior.

Tips for Faster NMODL
======================

> NMODL is a quirky language and not well specified, which results in NMODL files

Reviewer: "not formally specified" seems most impervious to criticism.

> NMODL is a quirky language and not well specified, which results in NMODL files

Author: Well we said 'quirky' already, so it might be a bit late for remorse, but fine ;)

being treated as un-understandable and untouchable. This in turn leads to

> sub-optimal performance, especially since mechanisms take up a large amount of

Author: I'll accept this although it transgresses the scope of the section

the simulations' runtime budget. With some understanding of the subject matter,
however, it is quite straightforward to obtain clean and performant NMODL files.

> We regularly have seen speed-ups factors from tuning NMODL of around three.

Author: 'around factor three' is not grammatical.

> We regularly have seen speed-ups factors from tuning NMODL of around three.

Reviewer: I think it is, just like 'around 20 per cent' would be. Main thing here is to remove the word 'tune', it is a bit jargon-ish for my taste.

> We regularly have seen speed-ups factors from tuning NMODL of around three.

Author: That would be fine, since you can say '20%' in this context. But the same does not hold for 'factor three', it needs an article.

> We regularly have seen speed-ups factors from tuning NMODL of around three.

Reviewer: Hmm, I've used it often without. Rule of thumb: the article can be left off if referring to a unspecific thing. But OK, see updated suggestion.

First, let us discuss how NMODL becomes part of a simulation. NMODL mechanisms
are given in ``.mod`` files, whose layout and syntax has been discussed above.

> These are compiled by ``modcc`` into a series of callbacks as specified by the

Author: We are in an Arbor documentation on how to make fast NMODL for Arbor so this is redundant for my taste

> These are compiled by ``modcc`` into a series of callbacks as specified by the

Reviewer: ok

mechanisms ABI. These operate on data held in Arbor's internal storage. But,
``modcc`` does not generate machine code, it goes through C++ (and/or CUDA) as
an intermediary which is processed by a standard C++ compiler like GCC (or nvcc)
to produce either a shared object (for external catalogues) and code directly
linked into Arbor (the built-in catalogues).

Now, we turn to a series of tips we found helpful in producing fast NMODL
mechanisms.

``RANGE``
---------

Parameters and ``ASSIGNED`` variables marked as ``RANGE`` will be stored as an
array with one entry per CV in Arbor. Reading and writing these incurs a memory
access and thus affects cache and memory utilisation metrics. It is often

> cheaper to use ``LOCAL`` variables instead, even if that means foregoing the

Author: It's not 'computationally' cheaper per-se. Actually it's worse, but cache/memory use makes more than up for it.
That's basically the core tenant of this guide.

> ability to re-use a comuted value. Compute is so much faster than memory on

Reviewer: Updated suggestion.

> ability to re-use a comuted value. Compute is so much faster than memory on

Reviewer: I have too much faith in my spell checker.

modern hardware that re-use at the expense of memory accesses is seldom
profitable, except for the most complex terms.

``PROCEDURE``
-------------

Prefer ``FUNCTION`` over ``PROCEDURE``. The latter *require* ``ASSIGNED RANGE``
variables to return values and thus stress the memory system for little gain, as
noted above. Also, they may not be inlined, as opposed to a ``FUNCTION``.

```PARAMETER``
--------------

``PARAMETER`` should only be used for values that must be set by the simulator.

> All fixed values should be ``CONSTANT`` instead. These can be inlined and folded

Author: Constant Folding is a thing.

> All fixed values should be ``CONSTANT`` instead. These can be inlined and folded

Reviewer: Jargon. Can we clarify or link to an explanation?

into the computations, allowing for further optimisations.

Sharing Expressions Between ``INITIAL`` and ``BREAKPOINT`` or ``DERIVATIVE``
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is often done using a ``PROCEDURE``, which we know is inefficient. On top,
this ``PROCEDURE`` will likely compute more outputs than strictly needed to
accomodate both blocks. DRY code is a good idea nevertheless, so use a series of
``FUNCTION`` instead to compute common expressions.

This leads naturally to a common optimisation in H-H style ion channels. If you
heeded the advice above, you will likely see this patter emerge:

.. code::

   na   = n_alpha()
   nb   = n_beta()
	 ntau = 1/(na + nb)
   ninf = na*ntau

   n' = (ninf - n)/ntau

Written out in this explicit way it becomes obvious that this can be expressed
in a more compact way

.. code::

   na   = n_alpha()
   nb   = n_beta()
	 nrho = na + nb

   n' = (na - n)*nrho

The latter code is much faster and neither ``modcc`` nor the external C++ might

> pick it up as an optimisations, largely due to floating point accuracy

Reviewer: `might pick it up as an optimisations`; I don't follow, it reads like the latter code is unlikely to be optimized. Wouldn't you want that?

Author: neither ... nor?

requirements. This is less easy to see when partially hidden in a ``PROCEDURE``.

The Conductance Trick
---------------------

``modcc``, Arbor's NMODL compiler, applies symbolic differentiation to the
current expression to find the conductance as ``g = d U/d I`` which are then
used to compute the voltage update. ``g`` is thus computed multiple times every
timestep and if the corresponding expression is inefficient, it will cost more

> time than needed. The differentiation implementation is less than smart and will

Reviewer: less smart than what?

Author: less than smart = not smart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
time than needed. The differentiation implementation is not very sophisticated and will
```

> not optimise the resulting code. This is an internal detail of Arbor, but it can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not optimise the resulting code. This is an internal detail of Arbor, but the conductance trick can
```

> help to produce well performing code. Here is an example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
help to produce well performing code by extracting and separately storing constant values. Here is an example
```

Author: That's redundant.

Reviewer: Which is a good thing.

Author: Not here, it makes the sentence longer, is not really to the point. The sentence before talks about the symdiff 'engine' and its lack of cleverness. _That_ is the bit of knowledge that result in the following being an optimisation.

.. code::

  : BAD, will compute m^4 * h every step
  i = m^4 * h * (v - e)

>   : GOOD, will just use a constant value of g

Author: If you read the above again carefully, you will notice that this 'storing is bad' is actually 'storing into `ASSIGNED`, especially `ASSIGNED RANGE` is bad, use `LOCAL` instead'.

>   : GOOD, will just use a constant value of g

Reviewer: Can you repeat this then? `ASSIGNED`, `ASSIGNED RANGE`, or `LOCAL` don't appear in the code snippet. When teaching, referencing to earlier material is usually appreciated.

>   : GOOD, will just use a constant value of g

Reviewer: Ugh, I forget that this is declared on a separately line.

All fixed values should be ``CONSTANT`` instead. These will be inlined by
``modcc`` and propagated through the computations which can uncover more
optimisation potential.

Sharing Expressions Between ``INITIAL`` and ``BREAKPOINT`` or ``DERIVATIVE``
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is often done using a ``PROCEDURE``, which we now know is inefficient. On top,
this ``PROCEDURE`` will likely compute more outputs than strictly needed to
accomodate both blocks. DRY code is a good idea nevertheless, so use a series of
``FUNCTION`` instead to compute common expressions.

This leads naturally to a common optimisation in H-H style ion channels. If you
heeded the advice above, you will likely see this patter emerge:

.. code::

   na   = n_alpha()
   nb   = n_beta()
	 ntau = 1/(na + nb)
   ninf = na*ntau

   n' = (ninf - n)/ntau

Written out in this explicit way it becomes obvious that this can be expressed
in a more compact way

.. code::

   na   = n_alpha()
   nb   = n_beta()
	 nrho = na + nb

   n' = (na - n)*nrho

The latter code is faster. Neither ``modcc`` nor the external C++ are likely

> pick it up this optimisation, largely due to floating point accuracy

Reviewer 2: > are likely pick it up this optimization

unclear sentence

Author: So true. Will be fixed.

Author: Done.

as opposed to a ``FUNCTION``.

```PARAMETER``
--------------

``PARAMETER`` should only be used for values that must be set by the simulator.
All fixed values should be ``CONSTANT`` instead. These will be inlined by
``modcc`` and propagated through the computations which can uncover more
optimisation potential.

Sharing Expressions Between ``INITIAL`` and ``BREAKPOINT`` or ``DERIVATIVE``
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is often done using a ``PROCEDURE``, which we now know is inefficient. On top,
this ``PROCEDURE`` will likely compute more outputs than strictly needed to
accomodate both blocks. DRY code is a good idea nevertheless, so use a series of
``FUNCTION`` instead to compute common expressions.

This leads naturally to a common optimisation in H-H style ion channels. If you
heeded the advice above, you will likely see this patter emerge:

.. code::

   na   = n_alpha()
   nb   = n_beta()
	 ntau = 1/(na + nb)
   ninf = na*ntau

   n' = (ninf - n)/ntau

Written out in this explicit way it becomes obvious that this can be expressed
compactly as

.. code::

   na   = n_alpha()
   nb   = n_beta()

> 	 nrho = na + nb

Reviewer 2: indentation here and below.

Author: Somehow a tab snuck through.

>    n' = (na - n)*nrho

Reviewer 2: isn't this supposed to be `na - n*(nrho)`?

Author: Yes.
